---
id: b4ead029-27ff-45e1-ba2a-cdd1796560c5
blueprint: article
title: 'Laravel 5.5 On Shared Hosting'
author:
  - f63eaccf-f416-499c-a19c-3fbfec4e4c77
topics:
  - server
  - laravel
  - php
  - development
updated_by: f63eaccf-f416-499c-a19c-3fbfec4e4c77
updated_at: 1754564202
---
I already wrote on how to deploy a Laravel 4 app on a shared server that doesn't allow the structure that requires a public folder, and the rest of the application outside that folder. Let's not get into reasons why you can't pick a better hosting provider, sometimes you just have no choice ;)

Since a long time has passed and Laravel 5.5 is out, let's give this another try. So let's say you're on a shared hosting server and you path looks something like this:
    
    /home/site-name/public_html</code></pre>
    
Turns out the setup is really simple. Just copy your entire application into that **public_html** directory. You'll get a structure looking something like this:

    /home/site-name/public_html/app
	/home/site-name/public_html/bootstrap
	/home/site-name/public_html/config
	/home/site-name/public_html/database
	/home/site-name/public_html/public
	/home/site-name/public_html/resources
	/home/site-name/public_html/routes
	etc.
    
Now move all the contents from the directory: **/home/site-name/public_html/public**
And paste it into: **/home/site-name/public_html**

After that you can delete the directory: **/home/site-name/public_html/public**

Now just edit the file: **/home/site-name/public_html/index.php**

Change this:

	require __DIR__.'/../vendor/autoload.php';

To this:

	require __DIR__.'/vendor/autoload.php';
    
And also change this:

	$app = require_once __DIR__.'/../bootstrap/app.php';

To this:

	$app = require_once __DIR__.'/bootstrap/app.php';


## Additional steps

Your JS and CSS assets will still be published to the **public** directory, which I personally don't like. So to tackle this we need to make some small changes to our **webpack.mix.js** file. You need to add the following line of code in there:

	mix.setPublicPath('dist/');

Just name the directory whatever you like, I just prefer using <strong>dist</strong>.

Also, you need to change the defaults from:

	mix.js('resources/assets/js/app.js', 'public/js')
		.sass('resources/assets/sass/app.scss', 'public/css');

To:

	mix.js('resources/assets/js/app.js', 'js')
		.sass('resources/assets/sass/app.scss', 'css');
        
The last step is updating your calls to the the **asset()** helper. You might have something like this in your views or layouts:

	{{ asset('css/app.css') }}

You need to change it to:

	{{ asset('dist/css/app.css') }}
    
Since now the assets are published to the <strong>dist</strong> directory.

***

That's it. I hope you managed to follow these simple steps, and if you have any problems simply leave a comment below.